[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neo.com
I'm your host Dylan Grabowski in this
episode of the smartte economy podcast I
sat down and spoke with Pavo SEL nikov
the developer relations lead at zkm a ZK
VM based Universal settlement Network in
this episode we spoke about Lessons
Learned in ethereum's growth and
applying them to bitcoin the different
types of L2 rollups the ethos of
decentralization and how zkm applies
that to its sequencer Network
sustainable Bitcoin yields and so much
more just a reminder nothing said on
this podcast is a solicitation to buy or
sell any tokens and that nothing should
be taken as Financial advice the host or
guest May hold tokens discussed in any
given episode and you can head over to
neon.pdf
but yeah excited to get uh get into it
yeah um in doing my research for zkm
there were a lot of fascinating threads
that I'm definitely looking forward to
pulling on but I think for our listeners
who maybe have been listening to me for
the better half of the past quarter um
I've been sort of getting a little
excited about Bitcoin l2s so I guess to
jump into the conversation um at a very
high level how can zero knowledge
technology being propagated by zkm help
to enhance the broader Bitcoin ecosystem
absolutely I guess um so that's a a big
question so I'll start with just the the
high level and and then try to go go
down so Bitcoin um where we see is uh a
store of value there's there's a lot of
utility as a form of um essentially you
have
the you have Bitcoin in the sense that
you want to to hold it and you want to
essentially
uh potentially uh just just do other
things and uh you know come back to it
and you know it's still there and um
where we are let's say in the in the
ethereum ecosystem there's a lot of um
let's say def stuff there's a lot of
like things where people are just going
um and creating like dexes and swaps and
there's like there's like uh perss and
all these other like Financial products
where we see how um that these these two
systems are let's say not independent of
each other but they're they're sort of
um they they help let's say grow the
entire uh let's say crypto ecosystem so
where we see um essentially the the
growth of both ecosystems is um we we
can essentially expand the uh utility of
Bitcoin with um I know I know when one
implementation was like the lightning
Network where payments essentially have
been prioritized as the main use case uh
and we see that there can be other
things um using uh the the Bitcoin
security using the decentralization of
Bitcoin being used for other things uh
than payments but still retaining the
same level of security uh that the uh
bitcoin's proof of work Network provides
so that's kind of the the idea of what
where we see that that value is that
ethereum provides uh a lot of that dap
Integrations and and all of this and um
uh even though Bitcoin doesn't have a
virtual machine that doesn't mean that
it's should be um limited to just
payments and and this sort of value
there can be other opportunities but
still native to bitcoin so are we like
entering a paradigm where both proof of
work and proof of stake networks are
kind of very valuable to the broader
blockchain ecosystem and maybe we need
to have support for all these different
Financial derivatives operating on top
of both to provide a more like resilient
blockchain enabled economy I think that
each system has its um they have the the
priorities and with this um the the the
store of value that Bitcoin provides uh
the the essentially the Dos that
ethereum has and then the utility of
potentially bridging that Gap with
between um using that store of value to
potentially grow it into something um
into something where we can have
additional Financial assets like
derivatives uh but still be native to
bitcoin so you don't need to go in and
and and uh have have uh the benefits of
financial products on other ecosystems
you can do it um in that same form of
ecosystem utilizing this um the security
of of Bitcoin so that's that's I guess
the
the like native Integrations as well so
you don't need to go um different
wallets or provider it's it's
essentially um trying to create the um a
system where uh you could still uh let's
say benefit from the utility of of both
that you don't have to pick and choose
cool yeah I love how zcam really focuses
on uh providing this like additional
functionality for Bitcoin while the end
user still maintains ownership over the
asset so I can't really I can't wait to
like dive into that a little bit later
but I kind of want to like take a few
steps back and um hear about like your
Genesis into the blockchain space like
how did you end up here and usually I
like to hear like a part of like a
two-part response first when was the
first time you heard about crypto and
Bitcoin and if you're anything like me
you heard about it and you're just like
oh cool and then ignored it for a few
years um and so when was like the first
time you heard about cryptocurrency and
then secondarily like what was your aha
moment when was it like that it clicked
for you and you're you're thinking to
yourself oh this is something this is a
place I want to be yeah yeah I well the
first time that I heard about Bitcoin uh
was essentially talking to I I saw it on
um on the internet somewhere just just
randomly I talked to my dad and my dad's
like no that's a scam don't do it don't
do it man uh and I'm like all right okay
and so um but then you know everything
was um I guess a lot of things happened
in in um later on so I think I joined I
would say like the educational component
for crypto in 2017 so that's when I
actually was doing my uh full-time role
as in like uh I I was part of an
incubator for um for blockchain based
project uh and then essentially the main
thing is like okay how do we find
utility Within These uh these decentral
the ecosystems and so that really
progressed into a lot of the uh like I
did lectures for uh defi uh for uh for
the Royal Bank of Canada and essentially
educating them on like yield farming and
and uh just tokens in general which is
really also interesting how um the the
other traditional financial institutions
are are interested in in in seeing like
how you know these these other like
non-traditional system work as well so
um I would say that that's that's sort
of the entry point and then from there I
I worked for um for medis and and
essentially doing developer relations as
well as like Ambassador coordination for
them and and uh yeah yeah essentially
building up the technical repertoire and
uh you know taking taking it like sort
of one step further and like all right
this is possible but then what about the
this next thing and then always on the
bleeding edge of uh of the tech back and
that's how I got here to to zkm
essentially uh just really interested in
seeing how these little pieces work and
then potentially T taking these systems
and applying it to what was pre what was
previously thought to be um not possible
um essentially the connections of
different blockchains and and and then
the interoperability of everything so I
think it's uh like really fascinating
that you came into the space as from
like an educational perspective in 201
17 and you were kind of out there boots
on the ground uh educating financial
institutions or or folks who worked in
these financial institutions maybe at
like meetups or when they would come to
like University events um so I guess
from your experience you know you're
seven years in now as an educator in
this space how has um like the level of
questions or the level of techn
technological expertise kind of improved
or maybe devolved over time what are
just kind of like your general insights
from the you know events that you've
been doing educating folks how has that
changed over the past seven years yeah
yeah like that's a that's a great
question in terms of the the the
questions did uh say progress in terms
of um it's it's kind like the the first
questions were just like how can we use
this um and then and then it's like what
is the value of this you know system and
then when people are like okay well um I
use this to do more than just you know
buy and then um and then uh hold um I
can use this for other types of or like
or like just for transaction processing
I can use this to potentially build
other systems off and then it's like
okay well whoa then then like the whole
like Layer Two CRA like craze happened
and then um and then everyone's now
building building uh all these all these
system systems that build really on top
of each other and then the kind of um
before it was it was like what can I use
this for and now it's like what can't I
use this for kind of and then and uh
like uh a lot of what we're doing even
is taking hardcore infrastructure and
technology and then seeing where it can
fit into these incomplete Parts where
it's like or isolated parts and seeing
if there's a way to uh merge it and
solve these difficult problems uh but
using like one cohesive text fact where
you don't need to learn like another
language in order to um do the do do
like a let's say verification of
different computation and especially
when you have like consensus um
structures implemented like proof of
word proof of stake um you don't want to
layer additional um let's say
blockchains on top of other blockchains
which then reduces security reduces
decentralization you don't know who
who's in control you want to instead
have um systems where you can verify
that certain parts of the consensus well
not certain but the consensus was
achieved on this blockchain and as a
result I can do things on on another
blockchain and and uh you want ultimate
guarantees for that you don't want to
have like reduced security as a result
of this so I think molding these things
into statements where um we can find
these these uh let's say Solutions where
where uh the most benefit is is is is
seen from so in this case like Ultimate
Security and and um essentially still
maintaining that decentralization is is
key we don't want to take take systems
and just create another bank at the end
of the yeah it's interesting that you
bring up um you know you mentioned
earlier there was an L2 craze and you're
just kind of talking right now about the
underlying security that in L1 like
Bitcoin or ethereum offers so I guess
I'm curious like is zkm like a true L2
when I think of like Bas there needs to
be like a centralized entity like
coinbase that is batching the
transactions and then using its own
sequencer and sending them to settle on
on ethereum so would we say that zkm is
like an L2 or is it like an L 1.5 1.75
how do you kind of like um wrap up this
kind of philosophy that you just spoke
about and relate it to the way that zkm
is interacting with these l1s like
Bitcoin and E absolutely yeah yeah yeah
so what what defines decentralization
what defines security so there's there's
different types of l2s that are that are
present so some of them are uh liate
rollups others are state state channels
others are side chains so there's
there's um um well they're they're in
their own category of let's say scaling
Solutions so they're not necessarily
considered like some of most of them are
just the um like there's a specific use
case um for this so so for example like
the the lightning Network um you have uh
essentially the ability to transfer
assets um and and have like very fast
transaction confirmation times uh but
there's some aspects of centralization
that that does occur so um there's like
there's a um let's say I think a two2
multisig um and then there's uh but it
can potentially support millions of uh
essentially transactions per second um
so there's like benefits for using this
for for payments um in terms of a rollup
so what a rollup uh would accomplish is
you can essentially take different um
you can you can have a um you have the
ability to have Smart contracts on there
so with the leveraging like existing uh
let's say financial instruments that are
present um on ethereum uh and then but
still offer that same benefit of
transactions per seconds being in the in
the millions and um what what do we also
mean by the uh let's say uh is it true
L2 this um this means that where is
where are the transactions inevitably
posted um and uh how can transactions if
they're not let's say um let's say
they're not finalized how can they be
challenged um and and in our case we
have we have a system where um we
Implement a challenge process process in
case um there is any form of uh
disagreements where the transactions
that were posted like a commitment was
posted on bitcoin if there's any
difference from the actual transactions
that have occurred uh essentially one uh
one user uh out of potentially you know
any amount of um uh nodes that are that
are essentially running can essentially
challenge it uh so in this case you you
have the uh abil you only need one
honest user in order to come in and and
uh make that challenge into secure the
entire network and that's um that's like
more of like the the optimistic style of
um of of the the verification um in
addition so you mentioned Bas and they
have a single sequencer so I don't know
if you know about uh mettis so so one of
the things that mettis did is that they
um they're the first layer to that
decentralize the sequencers so this
means that uh no there's no one single
point of failure in terms of who would
uh post the uh BBE badg of transactions
uh to bitcoin or sorry to to etherium
but in this case to bitcoin so we've
actually taken that core process of the
decentralized sequencer and applied it
to uh this system as well so essentially
um you there's no single point of
failure and in order to secure the
entire network only one node needs to uh
come in and actually uh say something if
if let's say some some fraud is detected
from the sequencer who posted that bat
and in this case that sequencer stake
would get slashed and there's other um
let's say economic guarantees for uh
this system and uh yeah in terms of in
terms of just the the uh comparisons um
I think that having that decentralized
sequencer um is very important
especially to maintain that uh the same
philosophy of uh decentralization within
um within the blockchain ecosystems we
don't want to rely on a single entity in
order to um facilitate transfers uh
because then that's again that's just an
exchange that's just another bank um so
we want to make sure that these
processes are fully uh fully
decentralized from uh that ected cool I
definitely want to dig into the
tradeoffs between centralized
decentralized shared sequencers in a bit
um but just kind of uh just to help
folks who are listening to this because
our audience isn't always like
necessarily like crypto natives uh
sometimes we have some folks who stumble
on the podcast because they're new to
blockchain and crypto in general so
maybe hearing someone Works in Devil is
a brand new job they've never heard of
before so could you just like like uh
maybe really quickly just explain what
your job as uh in developer relations Is
and maybe kind of based off of the
experience you've been able to
accumulate can you share some of your
insights into what you think makes a
good Deval team yeah absolutely so Devo
I would say is a a category of marketing
uh but specifically to developers you
what we are trying to do so so I'm in in
in that sphere um what me and my team
are doing is uh essentially taking the
uh the different aspects of the program
and explaining it in a way where uh
developers can easily just grasp the
concepts and start developing on top of
this infrastructure so I I mentioned
before how uh there is let's say a lot
of potential use cases that can arise
from let's say creating a a
where um based in um ZK where it is uh
provably correct so any computation that
is executed um is essentially guaranteed
correct even on machines that are
untrusted uh because the the actual
program that was run was run correctly
and as a result the answer to that is
correct um so in this case taking that
let's say complex idea and then breing
breaking it down to okay um what can we
build with these systems uh that can
provide uh a good level of usefulness to
the space so things like what we're
looking into specifically is trying to
solve the problem of trustless
cross-chain transactions to prove
essentially the a transaction on that
happened on one blockchain um that was
finalized settled uh can then be relayed
uh to another blockchain so essentially
you can um use a single communication
mechanism completely um in an untrusted
way and then send messages across
different blockchains using these ZK
proofs as a result so I know I sort of
dist detracted from that original
question but uh to to to give a short
answer it's uh explaining these complex
topic uh technical topics in a way that
developers can understand and um in the
future build out some of the tools and
some of the ideas that would be um let's
say very useful to have as as a as a uh
as a system of of of essentially getting
lot of uh essentially value from so the
the cross chain bridging for example
that uh we already see like
globalization for example has uh made
things much more accessible in terms of
economies so I I think of it as um the
uh globalization of uh leveraging many
different economies many different
blockchains and connecting them together
uh in a form where uh you're you're no
longer in just one ecosystem can only do
one thing and and then that's a you're
locked off from from everyone else I
think that the future is more
interconnected so um hopefully I
answered that question no yeah you did a
great job and um I guess maybe in like
two years ago uh if we were talking
cross-chain transaction we'd be talking
mostly about evm networks but with the
Advent of like ordinals and runes and
bit VM we're starting to see a lot more
of this experimentation that we've seen
in evm land kind of land in Bitcoin land
so when you're going out and you're
talking to all these developers and
you're trying to onramp um new folks
into the ecosystem the zkm ecosystem to
build maybe even to hire some Developers
what's like the level of interest that
you're seeing from folk can you assign
like a certain proportion to these are
ex Bitcoin Builders and these are why
ethereum builders that want to come work
with us or are you not really seeing
like an overlap like that you're just
kind of seeing people who are hungry to
uh really work at providing this like
globalization you were talking about and
just connecting uh long-standing l1s in
general yeah yeah so so in terms of the
the interest so it's definitely one of
the key parts to this is understanding
let's say the needs of um a blockchain
uh and to actually go a bit deeper to
the community what is the community look
for in uh what they are trying to see as
valuable so you know if if I'm you know
team team uh Bitcoin or I'm team
ethereum or cardano or cron or banso so
there there's like all of these
blockchains that that exist and there's
people that have their their own let's
say Vision on how this blockchain can be
used to fulfill uh let's say to solve a
a overarching problem so or just provide
value in general um so what we really
connected with uh at conferences for
example is that is that Bitcoin uh
holders um are looking for uh
essentially a a way that their capital
is cured that it's it's essentially like
uh it it it cannot be um it could not be
altered let's say by by a third party or
restricted by a third party and then
another um aspect that we found is is uh
yield so um the ability to uh
essentially um grow that Capital that
was uh put into Bitcoin and then into
into other other other way uh
specifically sustainable yield um um
people hold on to bitcoin because it's a
store of value and so we want to see if
that that store of value can also be um
applied in other uh other cases um so
you know if if gold for example is is um
is an asset that people hold because
it's that store of value if there's a
way to uh essentially um to to grow that
that that gold into into uh potentially
like uh to lend it out or to to uh have
uh ways that that you can still use your
Capital effectively and then um and then
still have it uh essentially work on
your behalf in that in that way so I
think that that that main those those
two two degrees is is uh something that
we've gone from speaking to people at uh
at these Bitcoin conferences um but of
course you know people have different
perspectives as well uh on on all of
this on each and every blockchain for
example so I would say ethereum and the
developers there are more are more into
the all right well how do we build more
layers on top of layers and and um you
know they're interested more in like
that Tech um Tech side of like Defi and
and and these things so that idea of you
know how can we uh have sustainable
yield um while also providing uh
essentially the uh Secure Solutions that
were created in other ecosystems and
then apply them to uh to essentially
grow um grow Bitcoin into into let's say
more uh more lucrative uh opportunities
for for those cap for that Capital story
yeah I want to dig into this a little
bit more like what is sustainable yield
because when I think of something that's
unsustainable I think of anchor protocol
that was built on top of Luna where they
guaranteed 20% interest and nobody
really knew where it was coming from or
how long it was going to go it was more
like a trust us bro you're going to find
this here um and you you're right the
Bitcoin Community is proud of hodling
their underlying assets um the majority
of folks who are DieHard Bitcoin
Believers think that this is a digital
store of value this is digital gold
potentially Bitcoin will even become the
ultimate settlement settlement Network
and that Bitcoin might even become the
world uh Reserve currency I'm not here
to say that will or will not happen but
these are the type of Believers that are
that are holding these assets and they
really don't want to let go of their
Bitcoin um they've been burnt in the
past by lending on Celsius or lending on
blockfi they had to send their Bitcoin
to a a trusted centralized entity and
both of those companies I just mentioned
failed spectacularly um and really
there's
a few kind of like native Solutions out
there like thorchain I'm thinking of
with its vaults and its lending that
kind of allow users to huddle their
Bitcoin but even with Thor Chain's um
earn program you still have to send your
Bitcoin to a Smart contract and that
smart contract holds that Bitcoin on
behalf of your wallet so where does uh
zkm kind of like fit into this how are
you guys providing sustainable yields
well also allowing Bitcoin holders to
kind of maintain over ownership over the
underlying Bitcoin asset very good
question so one of the one of the main
um I would say the main uh value
propositions is that the centralized
sequencer um so we've seen with uh
ethereum for example we have those um
those node that allow for uh you to take
ethereum and essentially leverage it as
a um as uh to to to essentially validate
transactions on ethereum itself so what
there are uh different types of uh
protocols on ethereum like uh Lio and
Rocket bu that um enable you to take uh
essentially a portion of that you hold
and you can allocate that to uh these
providers which then would run no
and then these nodes would be validating
transactions on ethereum and then
thereby giving you um a return in terms
of the um in terms of the amount that is
allocated so we see that uh a similar
process can be done with the
decentralized sequencers in a way where
uh you could take that uh capital and
essentially um for a average user you
know maybe running a sequencer isn't a a
uh oy it it's it's a bit too high of a
um an economic uh it's a big investment
so you only have like a certain amount
you can take that and essentially uh
grow you could you could essentially
pull the funds together and use that uh
as part of the sequencer stake in in
that and the provider would then Supply
the service of actually um a post
transactions on the Bitcoin Network and
as a result um that this the the uh
pulled assets together would be securing
the transactions that are that are on um
in in in this way on the uh the the
network essentially so the um and that
transactions a portion of that would go
to uh the people that Supply those uh
that Bitcoin or
um for the service of securing the L2 so
that's primarily how the system works
where we just essentially take that and
we can take those assets use it to
secure uh the network but we can also
take those assets um essentially the
Stak Bitcoin and we can essentially use
that to restake it into other uh other
places so we the similar concept you
taking Lio and you have um s s and that
sste can be used in other B5 protocols
so you still have uh that asset in
Bitcoin um but you are earning yield off
of the Bitcoin that you have Stak or
that provider so that sequencer but you
can still use um that Bitcoin that you
receed the St Bitcoin and you can use it
within the protocol and in that way
there can be other opportunities for
that um uh for that Bitcoin so you're
earning yield on the Bitcoin that you're
still holding and then as a result you
can take that and potentially put it
into a dect or a lending protocol like a
um and essentially earn value on top of
the Bitcoin that you have staked and so
in this way um you're essentially
earning more off of the assets that you
um you you are earning a yield on the
assets that you currently have have and
then you can use those assets for other
uh activities and uh there has been
developments with uh igen layer for
example is reaking so you can take
essentially that um the the the staked
Bitcoin that you have and you can use it
to restake and provide security for
other protocols or um essentially
there's there's the ability to take
assets and apply it into uh let's say
different different areas of course
there's some risk with providing that
because you're essentially um using
using Bitcoin as as a means to have
Economic Security for uh certain
protocols but then that is up to the
user to determine what is um in the the
let's say the the the risk of of uh of
of what the user is but we've seen that
the for example igen layer has very low
risk but sustainable returns and so
that's that's of course what we want to
focus on and prioritize is that
sustainable yield for providing um
essentially a service where um where
people still can retain uh the capital
and the rewards for uh essentially
holding and providing that's uh the
utility of uh Economic Security for um
other protocols and um you know there's
different markets for that uh it's kind
of like if uh insurance is is kind of
like the the overall um like imagine
Insurance you're putting it into a pool
and um the potential risk that something
happens is uh can be uh quite low um for
some insurance policies and quite high
for others but we want to prioritize on
the on the low and sustainable and make
sure that um you know the assets uh for
example do not have a uh significant
risk in in essentially having anything
happen and that you still have the as
that you can uh then use uh freely uh
within within the ecosystem and still
can exchange it for uh other uh liquid
assets got it so you can use your Stak
BTC for Lending and borrowing protocols
um but you also mentioned uh at the
beginning of kind of like the
sustainable yield model that um I I I
take my Bitcoin and then I put it into
staked Bitcoin and you mention that
there's kind of like an underlying yield
before I use stake Bitcoin for like a
like sort of lending protocols so where
where's the kind of like first level of
uh Bitcoin yield come from is the uh
decentralized sequencer that I stake my
Bitcoin to is this also like competing
to mine Bitcoin blocks and each block
that it wins um that Bitcoin that's one
is distributed to the Stak Bitcoin
holders or am I kind of making something
up that's not there so so there there
isn't a um proof of work aspect so the
the sequencers are not mining um the
block they are posting the uh let's say
estate commitment to the to bitcoin
itself so because there is a a state
commitment to to bitcoin um the
sequencer is essentially saying these
transactions that are included within
this state commitment is correct and
they are the ones posting that state
commitment and essentially without going
into too many too much detail um it's
that state commitment that is secured by
the Bitcoin Network um or the Bitcoin
blockchain which then um makes it so
that anybody can challenge uh what the
sequencer has posted and because it is
um because it was already uh posted on
on bitcoin uh and then included as as
one of the blocks or one of the
transactions in one of the block uh then
uh someone can challenge that uh
transaction or that state commitment
that was posted and as a result slash
the sequencer but essentially where the
does the yield come from it comes from
the fees that are paid out um uh to the
sequencer in order to post that
transaction to the Bitcoin Network and
so the sequencer does take um you know
minor fees to include those Bitcoin
transactions in a batch and then um part
of that that fee is uh paid to them to
actually post that transaction um and
part of that fee is paid out to the
sequencer directly now when you do a um
in this case uh when you're doing the
staked uh Bitcoin you can essentially
get yield um from um providing your
share of um of essentially Bitcoin for
that sequencer so that sequencer will
then do a revenue share split uh from
the revenue that it takes in from the
transactions that it uses to uh post to
L1 and so because there because the
sequencer is decentralized um there can
be um I think there might be an upper
limit to how many sequencers there there
can be but essentially people can start
up their own sequencer nodes and uh
essentially pull Capital together to
then uh be able to provide that service
of um processing transactions on the
network and then those transactions each
essentially have that fee of um uh that
that that that's a the transaction fee
and that transaction fee it essentially
gets split up across all um all uh let's
see uh stakers that that provided that
that's uh liquidity uh or or sorry e
economic uh stake uh hopefully that
makes s where the yield comes from so
it's not like the the Tera Luna anchor
where it's just we we're printing money
but where does the money come from or
where it's blockfi or Celsius where it's
like give us your money but I'm not
going to tell you what I use it for so
hopefully that is a bit more of a
transparent process in uh in the actual
um like execution of it um that you're
essentially using your capital and um
the goal is to use uh any amounts of
Bitcoin um that anybody can provide um
but then they they're using it to secure
uh let's say the entire uh rollup
Network so you're not limited to having
200 Bitcoin to uh to essentially secure
the network um you can have like you
know
0.001 and you can still um earn yield
off of that uh for providing that big so
I'm almost there I I think I understand
it and so based off of what you were
saying if I'm if I'm like consuming what
you said correctly basically it's the
folks who want to challenge the previous
transactions that were essentially
posted to bitcoin stake State through
the decentralized sequencer Network it's
every time that that challenge is made
there's a fee paid and then that fee is
distributed oh not not every time
anybody can make a challenge but in
order to make a challenge there is a
there is a fee associated with that but
uh that that fee is is um let's say not
relevant in the majority of cases so the
actual fees that come from uh let's say
executing the transaction so in a
regular case so let's say no fraud
occurs no nothing occurs um we're
processing you know thousands thousands
of transactions a second um and in that
in in each transaction has a small fee
associated with it um and and that fee
essentially goes to the sequencer and um
just regular transactions the
transaction fee goes to the sequencer
and then the sequencer essentially takes
part of that fee to post the uh F
commitment to uh the Bitcoin blockchain
and then the remaining amount of fee
goes to the sequencer but in the case of
the restating or sorry in the case of
the staking it goes uh and gets evenly
distributed distributed across all of
the people that have um essentially
provided that stake for that sequencer
got it and so and can you just help me
figure out who's paying the fee in this
instance so the users are paying the fee
um when they make transactions on uh
this layer 2 Network okay so the user of
the L2 is paying the fee but when I'm
staking my Bitcoin I'm I'm basically
like securing the the decentralized
sequencers so me as the Staker um I
don't have to really do anything it's as
activity grows on the ZK ml2 then the
yield will increase and and it will also
decrease as activity decreases that's
that's correct exactly and um yeah
essentially that's where that yield
would come from um and uh the important
part to note is that you still retain
that derivative of faked Bitcoin which
then can be used within the ecosystem um
or lending protocols or or decentralized
exchanges or uh you know ordinal and and
and the like so you could still use uh
that Capital that you have but it's
generating essentially passive income um
for the for the amount of of Stak um uh
Bitcoin that you have perfect and the
the Stak Bitcoin um are the users the
stakers are they receiving stbtc or
native Bitcoin as their yield so the
actually I'm not quite sure about the
exact uh amount but but they are
receiving let's say it can be exchanged
for uh Native Bitcoin so I believe that
in the same way that lending out on a
work where you would essentially receive
uh a derivative token I think like a
usdt uh for example um that you would
still be able to redeem it one to one
with usdt so I think that the stake
Bitcoin that you would receive uh can be
redeemed for uh you know Ono one with
the the um the actual um Native Bitcoin
so when you're making a withdrawal uh
let's say you do not want to provide
that stake anymore um then one is that
you can actually just exchange it on a
decentralized exchange um and then there
might be like a bit of fpage for that or
you can redeem it um for one to one uh
that value of stake Bitcoin so if you
have one stake Bitcoin you would be able
to redeem it for one uh Native Bitcoin
cool thanks for uh spending a little
more time on me yeah with me to to
understand it um I think that's super
fascinating so like one of the things
that I think the most longterm threat to
the Bitcoin Network as an L1 is um the
ability to continue paying my ERS in a
way that's sustainable in the future
especially as the subsidy continues to
decrease each year so is zkm like a part
of the solution to settling on bitcoin
as an L1 and providing these fees to
help subsidize the the miners and the
node operators um because there are
transaction fees and so is like zcam a
part of this broader solution and I know
that it's not just one project that is
going to to provide all the fees for for
Bitcoin Miners and node validators to
kind of like feed themselves in the
future there's probably going to have to
be hundreds of uses for l2s and other
like nft projects like ordinals that
settle on bitcoin but yeah do you guys
see yourself as like a part of the
long-term solution for bitcoin's uh
security yeah so the way that we work
the way that um like l2's deploying on
bitcoin is we generate uh transaction
that would then be um settled on bitcoin
so those transactions albe it's if if
it's just you know us it' be a very
minimal but they're still producing a uh
let's say the benefit to bitcoin um in
the form of um in order for the L2 to uh
to operate there still needs to be those
transactions that get applied on bitcoin
so um that is basically the the
guarantees so in order for our our
protocol our our the the L2 to function
uh we would need to make those
transaction so if those fees let's say
um like by miners when when let's say
the Bitcoin Supply um you know when when
when it essentially goes um to to uh
zero that can be actually issued and we
go into an entirely fee based model um
there is still going to be uh demand
from our side uh in order to pay the
miners to process those transactions so
I think um that even people moving to
l2s um that miners are still getting
rewarded for the uh for them uh for them
uh investing tons of compute power into
um into essentially mining these these
blocks so we we will always have that
demand um for transactions and so in
this case like uh if the supply goes
down and let's say goes to zero but let
let's say the fees then go up uh as a
result and maybe uh people that are
transacting just on bitcoin itself it
becomes way too expensive for them to
justify um posting on L1 uh we would
still be guaranteed to post to keep
posting transactions on L1 because
that's how we function but as a result
you know people might move to us as a
form to um pay less transaction fees as
a result and so you know that that that
essentially when when costs when
transaction costs would go up for the L1
it might not be profitable for most
users but it would be still profitable
for for us uh assuming that you know the
demand also takes off for for our L2 and
more people are processing transactions
on on that hopefully that answers the
question of sustainability over the long
term so even though like some users can
will not be able to use Bitcoin directly
but they are still inheriting um Bitcoin
security uh let's say through these
altitudes and then of course there's
there's more research in the space
there's potentially better ways that's
um that uh can exist for essentially
proving transactions and we're looking
into that uh right now on our research
arm on like how can we fully use ZK
proofs to uh essentially with without
the need for or let's say let's say um
um let's say like uh to make
transactions directly from Bitcoin to
ethereum or ethereum to bitcoin um but
of course that would require right now
uh as far as we know that that requires
still interoperability uh Solutions and
and some tradeoffs that that occur
within within those Solutions as well
yeah very cool thanks for helping to dig
further into how zcam is a part of
bitcoin's longer term uh solution for
security um we are kind of like uh
getting closer to the end of the hour um
but I do want to talk about sequencers
really quickly and I understand why uh
zcam might want to lean in to a
decentralized sequencer Network
particularly because decentralization is
at the core ethos of the Bitcoin Network
um but I want to hear from your
perspective why is zcam focusing on a
decentralized mechanism as opposed to a
centralized or a shared sequencer
Network and maybe as you're providing um
your answer you could also touch on um
some of the tradeoffs that each of the
three different type of sequencer
networks offer and maybe like the pros
and cons to zam's decentralized solution
absolutely so there are let's say many
different types of Pathways for uh
sequencing transactions So currently how
it works today is is uh for most l2s is
that 's a single uh sequencer and that
single sequencer is responsible for
posting uh transactions to layer one um
now there's problems when it comes with
um how is me handled uh so me is maximum
extractable value and that's uh
essentially uh front running so um when
when a person does a swap you can
essentially post a transaction um and
then let's say that that transaction
will uh like buy uh x amount of of of uh
ethereum or or something and then uh the
uh person sees that in the me pool and
then they see oh their buy XS them out
so then in this case um I want to um I
want to uh
essentially buy it before and so and
then sell it to them in in that
transaction so essentially uh I can
essentially sell them um this amount of
ether uh for a discounted price because
I know what the trade is going to be um
and then as a result the um the
sequencer potentially can extract that
value from the uh the person who has
posted it by reordering the transactions
so um there's different types of let's
say philosophies and some of them are
like um we can take this this Revenue
let's say uh if the sequencer decides to
to to do uh let's say the this ordering
of transactions we can take this revenue
and we can apply it into um like public
goods so so that's what optimism is
doing um and uh so others are are saying
no no no we're not going to reorder
we're not going to do anything um but of
course there there can't really be a
guarantee of that because uh since
there's a single sequencer it's a single
um what point of failure so so if they
start doing it there's really no other
option to uh use a different system um
so shared sequencing is when you use one
sequencer for multiple different network
or one one single um uh sequencer
potentially Network um so with with
medis actually so the they've taken um
decentralized sequencers so they
essentially created a a proof of stake
network uh but it for the sequenc
themselves so um it's not secured by
proof of state but it's essentially how
sequencer rotation is handled so it's
not the actual consensus it's not the
actual finalization it's just who gets
to process uh these transactions in in
um let's say ATO so so you get to
process from from uh transaction one to
transaction 100 so that's sequencer one
uh from transaction 100 to to
transaction 200 this is sequencer 2 and
so on and so forth so that um this also
has the benefit of uh instead of having
a um let's say if a sequencer behaves
maliciously in terms of meev extraction
uh they can actually be booted off the
network um if if that you know if if
they go into that uh that side of things
um in addition um as we've seen with
Linea uh they experienced a hack on the
network um and as results Linea shut
down uh their sequencer um for that
reason to prevent the attacker from
withdrawing funds um in in this case if
they can prevent this transaction or
let's say like this amount of
transactions from leaving the network
they can do it for any transaction um so
you know kind of like um you know if if
if you have the power to Sol stop the
blockchain then what's the point of a
blockchain um so in in in that um in
that in that way you know there might be
uh systems such as espresso uh that have
like these these uh for example shared
sequencers but we don't really know what
the uh true end goal of these systems
are right is the true end goal to have a
single point of failure to funnel all
rollups into one and so now they dictate
what transactions are approved what
transactions are not approved um I think
the you know there's there's uh an
ethereum there's like ofac complied
block and and of course you know if if
if you live in in in the US you know you
have to you have to make sure that that
everything's fact compliant and um
essentially under one um one aspect of
of rules and regulations but of course
like when we're when we're dealing in
crypto economies we want to essentially
have a way for people to choose
different types of systems that will not
prevent let's say their assets from
being just um just locked because of
some arbitrary reason so we essentially
want to create um systems where your
assets are yours and they can't be uh
essentially halted
or like like in in in in the cases of uh
Linea or uh potentially other shared
sequencing models so this this uh aim
for decentralized sequencers uh
essentially means uh greater security
for your assets because your assets are
your assets and not just um locked as in
potentially Celsius or block by case uh
where you provide them assets but they
still control uh access to them and if
they go bankrupt well you know well
sucks so um that that's the that's the
philosophy that we're going from um
where the ability for the network to
determine what happens to the sequencers
if they potentially do that me
extraction or um you know the network to
still continue to operate uh even if um
you know like let's say an entity a
government entity says no you have to
shut down the sequencer um I think that
that is what what the ethos of crypto is
and you know if if we support systems
that essentially go towards that path to
decentralization we don't want to create
systems where it's where it's uh you
know back to um back to the same uh
let's say problems that that you know
started Bitcoin essentially like the
2008 financial crisis where the money's
gone and uh uh get tough luck uh
fantastic answer um so wrapping up um
when main net and will US users be Geo
fenced out of zkm so uh I'm not actually
clear on the launch date so I think that
is the the actual like developer side
they're still working on that test net
actually so um still early in terms of
in terms of that and I'm not sure about
the um let's say the the Geo fencing
either um so that's that's still more of
like the operations and and processes
but uh the idea is um is essentially um
that we have that that's uh let's say
working internally and then now it's uh
now it's more of like the the uh
expansion processes part but that's
probably not not where I'm uh I'm I'm
best suited for for that I appreciate
the the candid response um so if
anybody's listening to this and they're
interested in building on top of zkm or
leveraging this technology what's the
best way they can reach out to you or
get in contact with the zkm team
absolutely uh my handle is pavoor Sino
um and of course zcam doio is the
website so that that would probably be
the the easiest way and um I'm that same
handle on telegram as well so if you um
yeah if you if you have any questions
about like what we're building and and
uh what what we're uh what we're
researching as well uh definitely head
on by and and we're glad to glad to
answer Pavo this was an awesome
discussion thank you so much for taking
the time to chat with us on the smart
economy podcast um I really enjoyed the
past hour and we got to dig into a lot
of really interesting and engaging
Concepts that I feel like are at the top
of the mind for hopefully not just
myself but a lot of the folks that are
in the blockchain space right now as we
kind of like emerge into the next level
of decentralization and enabling um l1s
and offering interoperability between
them uh via and L2 So yeah thank you so
much for for taking the time to chat
with us and I look forward to hopefully
catching you in person at an in-person
event uh some point down the road
absolutely yeah thank you Dylan cheers
well what did you think of that
conversation I thought it was
fascinating to delve further into how
zkm will offer yield on a native Bitcoin
asset it was also super interesting to
dig into zk's decentralized sequencer
Network and the security that it offers
and I really enjoyed connecting the dots
on how zkm as an L2 will enhance Bitcoin
security model particularly as Bitcoin
subsidy decreases roughly every four
years to keep up to date with the smarte
economy podcast head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing support for
us by raing and reviewing your favorite
episodes on your favorite podcasting
platforms every review and rate really
helps us get this show in front of more
ears and eyes and of course if you're a
neot token holder please consider voting
for Neo news today as your Council
representative we've proudly been
serving the Neo ecosystems since 2017
and we'll continue to do so by putting
portions of our Council rewards directly
back into ecosystem growth initiatives
with all that said thank you so much for
taking the time to listen to the smart
economy podcast and we're looking
forward to catching you guys next time